cep-9999.md, before:

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> Define the <code>menuinst</code> standard</td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft</td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Jaime Rodríguez-Guerra &lt;jaime.rogue@gmail.com&gt;</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Oct 14, 2021</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Mar 29, 2022</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> NA </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> NA </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

`menuinst` is a library used by `conda` to install menu items that point to commands provided by
`conda` packages. It operates by discovering certain JSON files located in `$PREFIX/Menu` after
linking the package to the environment.

This library has primarily targetted Windows. The original project supported Linux and MacOS, but
`menuinst` was never used in practice on those platforms. As a result, the required JSON metadata
diverged significantly in each platform, and the implementations were not kept up to date.

This CEP will attempt to standardize the `menuinst` interface by:

1. Providing a unified metadata schema for all platforms so a single document contains all the
   metadata required to create shorcuts in all platforms.
2. Enumerating the expected behavior for different configurations.
3. Defining a programmatic interface for implementors (CLI / API).

## Menu metadata schema

The full JSON schema is defined in [this document][menuinst-json-schema], but here you can see a
simplified overview of all possible keys and their default values:

```python
{
  "id_": "https://schemas.conda.io/menuinst-1.schema.json",
  "schema_": "https://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema",
  "menu_name": "REQUIRED",
  "menu_items": [
    {
      "name": "REQUIRED",
      "description": "REQUIRED",
      "command": [
        "REQUIRED",
      ],
      "icon": None, # path to ico / png / icns file
      "precreate": None, # command to run before the shortcut is created
      "precommand": None, # command to run before activation and 'command'
      "working_dir": None, # starting working location for the process
      "activate": true,  # activate conda environment before running 'command'
      "terminal": false, # open in terminal and leave it open
      "platforms": {
        "linux": {  
          # See XDG Desktop standard for details
          # https://specifications.freedesktop.org/desktop-entry-spec/desktop-entry-spec-latest.html#recognized-keys
          "Categories": None,
          "DBusActivatable": None,
          "GenericName": None,
          "Hidden": None,
          "Implements": None,
          "Keywords": None,
          "MimeType": None,
          "NoDisplay": None,
          "NotShowIn": None,
          "OnlyShowIn": None,
          "PrefersNonDefaultGPU": None,
          "StartupNotify": None,
          "StartupWMClass": None,
          "TryExec": None
        },
        "osx": {
          # See Apple docs for CF* and LS* variables
          # CF*: https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/General/Reference/InfoPlistKeyReference/Articles/CoreFoundationKeys.html
          # LS*: https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/General/Reference/InfoPlistKeyReference/Articles/LaunchServicesKeys.html
          "CFBundleDisplayName": None,
          "CFBundleIdentifier": None,
          "CFBundleName": None,
          "CFBundleSpokenName": None,
          "CFBundleVersion": None,
          "CFBundleURLTypes": None,
          "CFBundleDocumentTypes": None,
          "LSApplicationCategoryType": None,
          "LSBackgroundOnly": None,
          "LSEnvironment": None,
          "LSMinimumSystemVersion": None,
          "LSMultipleInstancesProhibited": None,
          "LSRequiresNativeExecution": None,
          "entitlements": None,
          #: list of permissions to request for the app
          #: see https://developer.apple.com/documentation/bundleresources/entitlements
          "link_in_bundle": None, 
          #: symlink a file (usually the executable in 'command') into the .app directory
        },
        "win": {
          "desktop": true, # create desktop location
          "quicklaunch": true, # create quick launch shortcut too
          "file_extensions": None, # file extensions to associate with shortcut in registry
          "url_protocols": None, # URI protocols to associate with shorcut in registry
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Note that each `platforms` sub-dictionary (`linux`, `macos`, `win`) can override the global values
of their `menu_items[*]` entry (e.g. redefining `command` to adjust the shell syntax).

Each JSON file will be validated against its `$id` schema at build time, as part of `conda-build`.

## Placeholders

Each platform must provide these placeholders, to be used in the value of any `str`-accepting key.
To be replaced, they must be wrapped in double curly braces: `{{ NAME }}`.

Placeholder | Value
------------|-------
`BASE_PREFIX` | Path to the base Python location. In `conda` terms, this is the `base` environment
`DISTRIBUTION_NAME` | Name of the base prefix directory; e.g. if `BASE_PREFIX` is `/opt/my-project`, this is `my-project`.
`PREFIX` | Path to the target Python location. In `conda` terms, this is the path to the environment that contains the JSON file for this menu item. In some cases, it might be the same as `BASE_PREFIX`.
`ENV_NAME` | Same as `DISTRIBUTION_NAME`, but for `PREFIX`.
`PYTHON` | Path to the `python` executable in `PREFIX`.
`BASE_PYTHON` | Path to the `python` executable in `BASE_PREFIX`.
`MENU_DIR` | Path to the `Menu` directory in `PREFIX`.
`MENU_ITEM_LOCATION` | Path to the main menu item artifact once installed. On Linux, this is the path to the `.desktop` file, on macOS it is the path to the `.app` directory, and on Windows it is the path to the Start Menu `.lnk` file.
`BIN_DIR` | Path to the `bin` (Unix) or `Library/bin` (Windows) directories in `PREFIX`.
`PY_VER` | Python `major.minor` version in `PREFIX`.
`SP_DIR` | Path to Python's `site-packages` directory in `PREFIX`.
`HOME` | Path to the user directory (`~`).
`ICON_EXT` | Extension of the icon file expected by each platform. `png` in Linux, `icns` in macOS, and `ico` in Windows. Note the dot is _not_ included.
**macOS-only** | `PYTHONAPP` | Path to the `python` executable installed in `PREFIX`, assuming the
`python.app` conda package is installed. Equivalent to `{{ PREFIX
}}/python.app/Contents/MacOS/python`. **Windows-only** | `SCRIPTS_DIR` | Path to the `Scripts`
directory in `PREFIX`. `BASE_PYTHONW` | Path to the `pythonw.exe` executable in `BASE_PREFIX`.
`PYTHONW` | Path to the `pythonw.exe` executable in `PREFIX`.

## Packaging guidelines

`conda` packages that wish to create a shortcut at install time must provide a JSON file such that:

- The JSON contents must pass schema validation.
- The JSON file must be placed under `$PREFIX/Menu`.
- The JSON file must INCLUDE the package name in its filename. We recommend sticking to
  `<pkg-name>.json` for simplicity.
- Packaging tools (e.g. `conda-build`) must check the above conditions are met when the package is
  being created.

## Expected behavior

Each platform follows a different standard with different target locations:

Operating system | Artifact type | User location | System location | Notes
-----------------|---------------|---------------|-----------------|-------
Linux            | `.desktop` file   | `~/.local/share/applications` | `/usr/local/share/applications` | Some other files are modified
macOS            | `.app` directory | `~/Applications` | `/Applications` |
Windows          | `.lnk` file | `{{ menu_name }}` directory inside Start Menu, Desktop, and/or Quick Launch | Start Menu | These locations are customizable and configured in the Windows registry.

- On Linux, little needs to be done because XDG delegates the responsibility to the desktop
  manager. The implementor only needs to create the `.desktop` file and adjust/add the menu XML
  file(s).
- On macOS, we had to come up with some ideas. The shortcut is actually an `.app` directory.
  Implementors must follow Apple's guidelines. See Addendum B for implementation details.
- On Windows, `.lnk` files are created with the Windows API. File type and URL protocol association
  is done in the [Windows
  registry](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/shell/fa-file-types).

Some installations might provide two modes: "Current user only", and "All users". This option is
not surfaced in the JSON metadata, but might be requested at creation time in the CLI or API. This
means that implementors must be able to handle user locations and system locations, as detailed
above. In particular, in-process permission elevation needs to be considered.

When a package is removed, the file artifacts need to be deleted to. If changes were done in other
resources (XML files on Linux, Registry on Windows), these need to be undone too.

## CLI interface

The implementor CLI is _not_ defined in this document. However, the integrations with `constructor`
need to be standardized. The proposed CLI is:

```shell
${IMPLEMENTOR} constructor --prefix ${PREFIX} [--base-prefix ${BASE_PREFIX}] [--mode user|system] [--make-menus | --rm-menus] [pkg-name ...] 
```

- `--make-menus` will create the menu items for the JSON files found in `$PREFIX/Menu`.
- `--rm-menus` will uninstall the corresponding menu items from the system.
- If values are passed next to these two flags, only the JSON files that match those package names will be handled. Others will be ignored.
- `--base-prefix` is optional and defaults to the value passed to `--prefix`. It is only needed when `IMPLEMENTOR` is installed in a location other than `--prefix` (e.g. `base` vs a custom environment, or system Python and a virtual environment).
- `--mode` is optional and defaults to the mark provided by the `--base-prefix` location.
  If a `.nonadmin` file is present there, `mode=user` will be assumed. Otherwise,
  `mode=system` will be assumed, with a fallback to `mode=user` if necessary.

## Backwards compatibility

Windows users do depend on the existing `menuinst 1.x` "schema". There are a lot of packages that
use it. This (unversioned) document needs to be kept around and respected. In the absence of the
`$schema` key, it will be assumed that the metadata is built with the legacy schema.

See Addendum A for a best effort in documenting it.

## References

* [Rework linux/osx support plus new simplified
  format?](https://github.com/conda/menuinst/issues/48)
* [Mamba's implementation in
  C++](https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba/blob/81a490a/src/core/menuinst.cpp)
* [Interactions between conda, conda-standalone, constructor and
  menuinst](https://gist.github.com/jaimergp/7de5843421d63fa4a408ac5c8712c3c9)
* [Change the API to `menuinst.install(path_or_dict)`](https://github.com/conda/menuinst/issues/25)
* [`menuinst` wiki as of
  2021.10.18](https://github.com/conda/menuinst/wiki/Menu-Shortcut-Config-Structure/632fbc84251c8a8093e1b56b0b5314d23c1e946b)
* [freedesktop.org
  specification](https://specifications.freedesktop.org/desktop-entry-spec/desktop-entry-spec-latest.html#recognized-keys)
* [Core Foundation Keys
  (info.plist)](https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/General/Reference/InfoPlistKeyReference/Articles/CoreFoundationKeys.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40009249-SW1)
* [File type association in
  Windows](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/shell/fa-file-types)
* [Default programs in
  Windows](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/shell/default-programs)

## Copyright

All CEPs are explicitly [CC0 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

---

## Addendum A

### `menuinst 1.x` pre-standard

The required metadata for each platform is documented in [the `menuinst` wiki][wiki]. However, only
Windows is really supported by the tool. This assymmetrical growth has allowed Windows to grow an
ad-hoc specification that doesn't really translate well to other platforms.

The overall schema seems to be:

```python
{
  "menu_name": str,
  "menu_items": list of dict,
}
```

Unfortunately, each menu item dict (let's call it `MenuItem`) takes a different form in each
platform.

#### `MenuItem` on Windows

```python
{
  ["system" | "script" | "pyscript" | "pywscript" | "webbrowser"]: str,
  "scriptargument": str,
  "scriptarguments": list of str,
  "name": str,
  "workdir": str,
  "icon": str,
  "desktop": bool,
  "quicklaunch": bool,
}
```

Currently allowed placeholders are:

* `${PREFIX}`: Python environment prefix
* `${ROOT_PREFIX}`: Python environment prefix of root (conda or otherwise) installation
* `${PYTHON_SCRIPTS}`: Scripts folder in Python environment, `${PREFIX}/Scripts`
* `${MENU_DIR}`: Folder for menu config and icon files, `${PREFIX}/Menu`
* `${PERSONALDIR}`: Not sure
* `${USERPROFILE}`: User's home folder
* `${ENV_NAME}`: The environment in which this shortcut lives.
* `${DISTRIBUTION_NAME}`: The name of the folder of the root prefix, for example "Miniconda" if
  distribution installed at "C:\Users\Miniconda".
* `${PY_VER}`: The Python major version only. This is taken from the root prefix. Used generally
  for placing shortcuts under a menu of a parent installation.
* `${PLATFORM}`: one of (32-bit) or (64-bit). This is taken from the root prefix. Used generally
  for placing shortcuts under a menu of a parent installation.

#### `MenuItem` on MacOS

```python
{
    "cmd": str,
    "name": str,
    "icns": str,
}
```

Currently allowed placeholders are:

* `${BIN_DIR}`: `PREFIX/bin`
* `${MENU_DIR}`: `PREFIX/Menu`

#### `MenuItem` on Linux

```python
{
    "cmd": list of str,
    "id": str,
    "name": str,
    "comment": str.
    "terminal": bool,
    "icon": str,
},
```

On Linux, only `cmd` can take two special placeholders `{{FILEBROWSER}}` and `{{WEBBROWSER}}`,
which are replaced by the default Desktop file explorer, and the default web browser, respectively.

#### Identified problems

##### The `command` interface

Windows has several ways to specify which command should be run with the shortcut:

* `system` + `scriptargument[s]`: path to executable plus its arguments.
* `script` + `scriptargument[s]`: same as above, but the executable is run in a subprocess after
  invoking `ROOT_PYTHON cwp.py PREFIX`.
* `pyscript`: hardcodes `script` to be `PREFIX/python.exe` and takes the value as the first (and
  only) argument.
* `pywscript`: same as above, but uses `pythonw.exe` as the launcher to, theoretically, avoid
  launching a console window next to your application.
* `webbrowser`: alias to `PREFIX/python -m webbrowser -t URL`.

On Linux the command is specified with `cmd`, expressed as a list of strings. On MacOS, `cmd` is
also taken, but in this case it's expected to be a raw string.

##### The `icon` key

Windows and Linux expect `icon`. MacOS expects `icns`. Each platform requires a different file
format, but that can be arranged with placeholders.

##### Standardize the placeholders

Allowed placeholders vary vastly across platforms. A common subset must be identified and
implemented. Per-platform options are allowed but only when strictly necessary.

## Addendum B: Implementation details in macOS

- Most of the macOS-specific settings map to the `.app`'s `Info.plist` key-value pairs.
- The shell script with the `precommand` + `activate` + `command` logic is located in
  `<NAME>.app/Contents/MacOS/<NAME>-script`.
- A binary launcher is required for correct system integration (see reasons
  [(1)](https://github.com/napari/packaging/issues/38) and
  [(2)](https://github.com/napari/packaging/issues/59#issuecomment-1363367877)). This is placed at
  `<NAME>.app/Contents/MacOS/<NAME>`. The proposed launcher simply guesses its own location to find
  the `*-script` file, which is spawned in a subprocess. In some cases, if an external binary is
  required, it needs to be symlinked into the `.app` directory.
- URL protocol association requires special support in the binary launcher. Implementors can choose
  how to implement it. [See here for ideas](https://github.com/conda/menuinst/issues/118).

<!--links-->
[wiki]:
    https://github.com/conda/menuinst/wiki/Menu-Shortcut-Config-Structure/632fbc84251c8a8093e1b56b0b5314d23c1e946b

[menuinst]: https://github.com/conda/menuinst/blob/cep-devel/menuinst/data/menuinst.schema.json

Commit message:

Propose alternative to `... constructor --make-menus`

cep-9999.md, after:

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> Define the <code>menuinst</code> standard</td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft</td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Jaime Rodríguez-Guerra &lt;jaime.rogue@gmail.com&gt;</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Oct 14, 2021</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Mar 29, 2022</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> NA </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> NA </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

`menuinst` is a library used by `conda` to install menu items that point to commands provided by
`conda` packages. It operates by discovering certain JSON files located in `$PREFIX/Menu` after
linking the package to the environment.

This library has primarily targetted Windows. The original project supported Linux and MacOS, but
`menuinst` was never used in practice on those platforms. As a result, the required JSON metadata
diverged significantly in each platform, and the implementations were not kept up to date.

This CEP will attempt to standardize the `menuinst` interface by:

1. Providing a unified metadata schema for all platforms so a single document contains all the
   metadata required to create shorcuts in all platforms.
2. Enumerating the expected behavior for different configurations.
3. Defining a programmatic interface for implementors (CLI / API).

## Menu metadata schema

The full JSON schema is defined in [this document][menuinst-json-schema], but here you can see a
simplified overview of all possible keys and their default values:

```python
{
  "id_": "https://schemas.conda.io/menuinst-1.schema.json",
  "schema_": "https://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema",
  "menu_name": "REQUIRED",
  "menu_items": [
    {
      "name": "REQUIRED",
      "description": "REQUIRED",
      "command": [
        "REQUIRED",
      ],
      "icon": None, # path to ico / png / icns file
      "precreate": None, # command to run before the shortcut is created
      "precommand": None, # command to run before activation and 'command'
      "working_dir": None, # starting working location for the process
      "activate": true,  # activate conda environment before running 'command'
      "terminal": false, # open in terminal and leave it open
      "platforms": {
        "linux": {  
          # See XDG Desktop standard for details
          # https://specifications.freedesktop.org/desktop-entry-spec/desktop-entry-spec-latest.html#recognized-keys
          "Categories": None,
          "DBusActivatable": None,
          "GenericName": None,
          "Hidden": None,
          "Implements": None,
          "Keywords": None,
          "MimeType": None,
          "NoDisplay": None,
          "NotShowIn": None,
          "OnlyShowIn": None,
          "PrefersNonDefaultGPU": None,
          "StartupNotify": None,
          "StartupWMClass": None,
          "TryExec": None
        },
        "osx": {
          # See Apple docs for CF* and LS* variables
          # CF*: https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/General/Reference/InfoPlistKeyReference/Articles/CoreFoundationKeys.html
          # LS*: https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/General/Reference/InfoPlistKeyReference/Articles/LaunchServicesKeys.html
          "CFBundleDisplayName": None,
          "CFBundleIdentifier": None,
          "CFBundleName": None,
          "CFBundleSpokenName": None,
          "CFBundleVersion": None,
          "CFBundleURLTypes": None,
          "CFBundleDocumentTypes": None,
          "LSApplicationCategoryType": None,
          "LSBackgroundOnly": None,
          "LSEnvironment": None,
          "LSMinimumSystemVersion": None,
          "LSMultipleInstancesProhibited": None,
          "LSRequiresNativeExecution": None,
          "entitlements": None,
          #: list of permissions to request for the app
          #: see https://developer.apple.com/documentation/bundleresources/entitlements
          "link_in_bundle": None, 
          #: symlink a file (usually the executable in 'command') into the .app directory
        },
        "win": {
          "desktop": true, # create desktop location
          "quicklaunch": true, # create quick launch shortcut too
          "file_extensions": None, # file extensions to associate with shortcut in registry
          "url_protocols": None, # URI protocols to associate with shorcut in registry
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Note that each `platforms` sub-dictionary (`linux`, `macos`, `win`) can override the global values
of their `menu_items[*]` entry (e.g. redefining `command` to adjust the shell syntax).

Each JSON file will be validated against its `$id` schema at build time, as part of `conda-build`.

## Placeholders

Each platform must provide these placeholders, to be used in the value of any `str`-accepting key.
To be replaced, they must be wrapped in double curly braces: `{{ NAME }}`.

Placeholder | Value
------------|-------
`BASE_PREFIX` | Path to the base Python location. In `conda` terms, this is the `base` environment
`DISTRIBUTION_NAME` | Name of the base prefix directory; e.g. if `BASE_PREFIX` is `/opt/my-project`, this is `my-project`.
`PREFIX` | Path to the target Python location. In `conda` terms, this is the path to the environment that contains the JSON file for this menu item. In some cases, it might be the same as `BASE_PREFIX`.
`ENV_NAME` | Same as `DISTRIBUTION_NAME`, but for `PREFIX`.
`PYTHON` | Path to the `python` executable in `PREFIX`.
`BASE_PYTHON` | Path to the `python` executable in `BASE_PREFIX`.
`MENU_DIR` | Path to the `Menu` directory in `PREFIX`.
`MENU_ITEM_LOCATION` | Path to the main menu item artifact once installed. On Linux, this is the path to the `.desktop` file, on macOS it is the path to the `.app` directory, and on Windows it is the path to the Start Menu `.lnk` file.
`BIN_DIR` | Path to the `bin` (Unix) or `Library/bin` (Windows) directories in `PREFIX`.
`PY_VER` | Python `major.minor` version in `PREFIX`.
`SP_DIR` | Path to Python's `site-packages` directory in `PREFIX`.
`HOME` | Path to the user directory (`~`).
`ICON_EXT` | Extension of the icon file expected by each platform. `png` in Linux, `icns` in macOS, and `ico` in Windows. Note the dot is _not_ included.
**macOS-only** | `PYTHONAPP` | Path to the `python` executable installed in `PREFIX`, assuming the
`python.app` conda package is installed. Equivalent to `{{ PREFIX
}}/python.app/Contents/MacOS/python`. **Windows-only** | `SCRIPTS_DIR` | Path to the `Scripts`
directory in `PREFIX`. `BASE_PYTHONW` | Path to the `pythonw.exe` executable in `BASE_PREFIX`.
`PYTHONW` | Path to the `pythonw.exe` executable in `PREFIX`.

## Packaging guidelines

`conda` packages that wish to create a shortcut at install time must provide a JSON file such that:

- The JSON contents must pass schema validation.
- The JSON file must be placed under `$PREFIX/Menu`.
- The JSON file must INCLUDE the package name in its filename. We recommend sticking to
  `<pkg-name>.json` for simplicity.
- Packaging tools (e.g. `conda-build`) must check the above conditions are met when the package is
  being created.

## Expected behavior

Each platform follows a different standard with different target locations:

Operating system | Artifact type | User location | System location | Notes
-----------------|---------------|---------------|-----------------|-------
Linux            | `.desktop` file   | `~/.local/share/applications` | `/usr/local/share/applications` | Some other files are modified
macOS            | `.app` directory | `~/Applications` | `/Applications` |
Windows          | `.lnk` file | `{{ menu_name }}` directory inside Start Menu, Desktop, and/or Quick Launch | Start Menu | These locations are customizable and configured in the Windows registry.

- On Linux, little needs to be done because XDG delegates the responsibility to the desktop
  manager. The implementor only needs to create the `.desktop` file and adjust/add the menu XML
  file(s).
- On macOS, we had to come up with some ideas. The shortcut is actually an `.app` directory.
  Implementors must follow Apple's guidelines. See Addendum B for implementation details.
- On Windows, `.lnk` files are created with the Windows API. File type and URL protocol association
  is done in the [Windows
  registry](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/shell/fa-file-types).

Some installations might provide two modes: "Current user only", and "All users". This option is
not surfaced in the JSON metadata, but might be requested at creation time in the CLI or API. This
means that implementors must be able to handle user locations and system locations, as detailed
above. In particular, in-process permission elevation needs to be considered.

When a package is removed, the file artifacts need to be deleted to. If changes were done in other
resources (XML files on Linux, Registry on Windows), these need to be undone too.

## CLI interface

The implementor CLI is _not_ defined in this document. However, the integrations with `constructor`
need to be standardized if they are going to be kept in use. 

The proposed CLI (inspired by what's already in use to introduce minimal changes) is:

```shell
${IMPLEMENTOR} constructor --prefix ${PREFIX} [--base-prefix ${BASE_PREFIX}] [--mode user|system] [--make-menus | --rm-menus] [pkg-name ...] 
```

- `--make-menus` will create the menu items for the JSON files found in `$PREFIX/Menu`.
- `--rm-menus` will uninstall the corresponding menu items from the system.
- If values are passed next to these two flags, only the JSON files that match those package names
  will be handled. Others will be ignored.
- `--base-prefix` is optional and defaults to the value passed to `--prefix`. It is only needed
  when `IMPLEMENTOR` is running from a location other than `--prefix` (e.g. `base` vs a custom
  environment, or system Python and a virtual environment).
- `--mode` is optional and defaults to the mark provided by the `--base-prefix` location. If a
  `.nonadmin` file is present there, `mode=user` will be assumed. Otherwise, `mode=system` will be
  assumed, with a fallback to `mode=user` if necessary.

Alternatively, the `constructor` subcommand needs for menus can be dropped if `IMPLEMENTOR`
supports new settings and/or CLI flags. Namely:

- `base_prefix`: override the assumed `base` environment location. This is nowadays available as
  `root_prefix` but overriding this with environment variables is buggy in `conda` and needs to be
  fixed.
- Extend `shortcuts` with the ability of accepting values (true, false, or a list of strings).
  - `--shortcuts` would set `shortcuts=True`, which is the default otherwise.
  - `--no-shorcuts` would set `shortcuts=False`.
  - `--shortcuts pkg1 pkg2 ...` would set `shortcuts=[pkg1, pkg2, ...]`, which would instruct
    `IMPLEMENTOR` to handle menu item creation or removal for those packages only.

## Backwards compatibility

Windows users do depend on the existing `menuinst 1.x` "schema". There are a lot of packages that
use it. This (unversioned) document needs to be kept around and respected. In the absence of the
`$schema` key, it will be assumed that the metadata is built with the legacy schema.

See Addendum A for a best effort in documenting it.

## References

* [Rework linux/osx support plus new simplified
  format?](https://github.com/conda/menuinst/issues/48)
* [Mamba's implementation in
  C++](https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba/blob/81a490a/src/core/menuinst.cpp)
* [Interactions between conda, conda-standalone, constructor and
  menuinst](https://gist.github.com/jaimergp/7de5843421d63fa4a408ac5c8712c3c9)
* [Change the API to `menuinst.install(path_or_dict)`](https://github.com/conda/menuinst/issues/25)
* [`menuinst` wiki as of
  2021.10.18](https://github.com/conda/menuinst/wiki/Menu-Shortcut-Config-Structure/632fbc84251c8a8093e1b56b0b5314d23c1e946b)
* [freedesktop.org
  specification](https://specifications.freedesktop.org/desktop-entry-spec/desktop-entry-spec-latest.html#recognized-keys)
* [Core Foundation Keys
  (info.plist)](https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/General/Reference/InfoPlistKeyReference/Articles/CoreFoundationKeys.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40009249-SW1)
* [File type association in
  Windows](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/shell/fa-file-types)
* [Default programs in
  Windows](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/shell/default-programs)

## Copyright

All CEPs are explicitly [CC0 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

---

## Addendum A

### `menuinst 1.x` pre-standard

The required metadata for each platform is documented in [the `menuinst` wiki][wiki]. However, only
Windows is really supported by the tool. This assymmetrical growth has allowed Windows to grow an
ad-hoc specification that doesn't really translate well to other platforms.

The overall schema seems to be:

```python
{
  "menu_name": str,
  "menu_items": list of dict,
}
```

Unfortunately, each menu item dict (let's call it `MenuItem`) takes a different form in each
platform.

#### `MenuItem` on Windows

```python
{
  ["system" | "script" | "pyscript" | "pywscript" | "webbrowser"]: str,
  "scriptargument": str,
  "scriptarguments": list of str,
  "name": str,
  "workdir": str,
  "icon": str,
  "desktop": bool,
  "quicklaunch": bool,
}
```

Currently allowed placeholders are:

* `${PREFIX}`: Python environment prefix
* `${ROOT_PREFIX}`: Python environment prefix of root (conda or otherwise) installation
* `${PYTHON_SCRIPTS}`: Scripts folder in Python environment, `${PREFIX}/Scripts`
* `${MENU_DIR}`: Folder for menu config and icon files, `${PREFIX}/Menu`
* `${PERSONALDIR}`: Not sure
* `${USERPROFILE}`: User's home folder
* `${ENV_NAME}`: The environment in which this shortcut lives.
* `${DISTRIBUTION_NAME}`: The name of the folder of the root prefix, for example "Miniconda" if
  distribution installed at "C:\Users\Miniconda".
* `${PY_VER}`: The Python major version only. This is taken from the root prefix. Used generally
  for placing shortcuts under a menu of a parent installation.
* `${PLATFORM}`: one of (32-bit) or (64-bit). This is taken from the root prefix. Used generally
  for placing shortcuts under a menu of a parent installation.

#### `MenuItem` on MacOS

```python
{
    "cmd": str,
    "name": str,
    "icns": str,
}
```

Currently allowed placeholders are:

* `${BIN_DIR}`: `PREFIX/bin`
* `${MENU_DIR}`: `PREFIX/Menu`

#### `MenuItem` on Linux

```python
{
    "cmd": list of str,
    "id": str,
    "name": str,
    "comment": str.
    "terminal": bool,
    "icon": str,
},
```

On Linux, only `cmd` can take two special placeholders `{{FILEBROWSER}}` and `{{WEBBROWSER}}`,
which are replaced by the default Desktop file explorer, and the default web browser, respectively.

#### Identified problems

##### The `command` interface

Windows has several ways to specify which command should be run with the shortcut:

* `system` + `scriptargument[s]`: path to executable plus its arguments.
* `script` + `scriptargument[s]`: same as above, but the executable is run in a subprocess after
  invoking `ROOT_PYTHON cwp.py PREFIX`.
* `pyscript`: hardcodes `script` to be `PREFIX/python.exe` and takes the value as the first (and
  only) argument.
* `pywscript`: same as above, but uses `pythonw.exe` as the launcher to, theoretically, avoid
  launching a console window next to your application.
* `webbrowser`: alias to `PREFIX/python -m webbrowser -t URL`.

On Linux the command is specified with `cmd`, expressed as a list of strings. On MacOS, `cmd` is
also taken, but in this case it's expected to be a raw string.

##### The `icon` key

Windows and Linux expect `icon`. MacOS expects `icns`. Each platform requires a different file
format, but that can be arranged with placeholders.

##### Standardize the placeholders

Allowed placeholders vary vastly across platforms. A common subset must be identified and
implemented. Per-platform options are allowed but only when strictly necessary.

## Addendum B: Implementation details in macOS

- Most of the macOS-specific settings map to the `.app`'s `Info.plist` key-value pairs.
- The shell script with the `precommand` + `activate` + `command` logic is located in
  `<NAME>.app/Contents/MacOS/<NAME>-script`.
- A binary launcher is required for correct system integration (see reasons
  [(1)](https://github.com/napari/packaging/issues/38) and
  [(2)](https://github.com/napari/packaging/issues/59#issuecomment-1363367877)). This is placed at
  `<NAME>.app/Contents/MacOS/<NAME>`. The proposed launcher simply guesses its own location to find
  the `*-script` file, which is spawned in a subprocess. In some cases, if an external binary is
  required, it needs to be symlinked into the `.app` directory.
- URL protocol association requires special support in the binary launcher. Implementors can choose
  how to implement it. [See here for ideas](https://github.com/conda/menuinst/issues/118).

<!--links-->
[wiki]:
    https://github.com/conda/menuinst/wiki/Menu-Shortcut-Config-Structure/632fbc84251c8a8093e1b56b0b5314d23c1e946b

[menuinst]: https://github.com/conda/menuinst/blob/cep-devel/menuinst/data/menuinst.schema.json
