<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> Technical specification for creation and deletion of conda environments </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Jaime Rodríguez-Guerra &lt;jrodriguez@quansight.com&gt;</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Jun 10, 2022</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Jun 10, 2022</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> NA </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> NA </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

Conda environments have existed for more than 10 years. During most of that time,
`conda` was the only tool available to create, modify and delete conda environments. As a result,
once the Python implementation was considered stable enough, its integration test suite could be
regarded as the only technical specification needed for practical purposes.

However, as other tools appeared in the ecosystem (namely `mamba` and `micromamba`, along with the
`libmamba`-based solver), some of the tests contained in the integration suite did not adjust to
the ecosystem expectations (tests too strict, too tied to `conda` implementation details,
ambiguous results, conflicting outcomes across different tests, etc).

In this CEP, we'd like to propose a minimum set of guidelines any software implementation that
operates on `conda` environments should adhere to.

## Specification

The technical specification will list a set of cases where known input conditions are given, and
list the expected outcome and its rationale. It will be detailed at the command-line interface
level following conda's 4.13 implementation. However, this CEP will not try to standardize the CLI
commands, subcommands or flags. That work can be discussed in a different CEP.

### Terminology

#### Conda environment

The [conda docs][conda-docs-environments] define a `conda` environment as a "a directory that
contains a specific collection of conda packages that you have installed". However, the internal
structure of that directory is not fully specified, since it depends on the contents of the
packages installed.

The only technical requirement enforced by `conda` activation mechanisms is that the environment
must contain a `conda-meta` directory with a `history` file. Other than that, the environment can
contain anything. It must be noted, though, that there are other important locations which might be
present in the directory tree. These are optional, but have a role in the conda environment
lifecycle:

- `bin/`: added to PATH on Unix
- `lib/`: searched for dynamic libraries on Unix
- `Scripts/`, `Library/bin`: added to PATH on Windows
- `etc/conda/activate.d`, `etc/conda/deactivate.d`: searched for activation and deactivation
  scripts, respectively

#### Package record

Also known as a repodata record. A collection of metadata that refer to a concrete and specific
instance of a package artifact, usually a `.tar.bz2` or a `.conda` file. The conda channels list
package records in their `repodata.json` files. Check the [repodata record schema][repodata-record]
and the [`PackageRecord` classes][packagerecord] for more details.

The most important fields are:

* `name`, `version` and `build`: these three strings are used to fully identify the package record.
* `depends`: list of match specifications the package record requires in order to run.
* `constrains`: list of match specifications that impose restraints on non-required packages
  installed in the same environment.
* `track_features`: list of arbitrary strings used to de-prioritize variants of a package record
  (the more items in this list, the more de-prioritized the package record gets).
* `sha256`: unique hash of the file.
* `subdir`: platform this package has been built for (including `noarch`).

#### Match specification

Also known as _match spec_. A domain-specific language to query conda channels for one or more
package records. There's no implementation agnostic specification available, so the best resource
so far is [conda's `MatchSpec` class][matchspec-class].

#### Environment file

A YAML file that defines a list of match specs that will be used to create or update a conda
environment. It can optionally list channels and the name of the environment to be created.
Interestingly, it also supports some `pip` interfacing: the file can detail which PyPI packages
should be installed in the environment too.

#### Lock file

A file that defines a list of package records so a conda environment can be created
deterministically, without using match specs (which requires invoking a solver). There are two types
of lock files in the conda ecosystem:

- Unified lock file: A YAML file generated by conda-lock, with multi-platform support.
- Explicit lock file: Legacy format that employs a TXT file to list packages via their URLs and
  hashes. It can only express the requirements for a single platform.

#### History file

A plain-text file with a diff-like syntax that collects the match specifications used to modify
a conda environment during its lifetime. It's always located under `conda-meta/history`.

#### Pinning

Conda environments can mark some of the installed packages as "pinned", meaning that their version
changes are constrained in some way. To do so, a plain text file can list the packages and their
restraints in a `conda-meta/pinned` file. Pinnings can be overriden under certain circumstances.

<!------------------------------------>
<!-- Creation of conda environments -->
<!------------------------------------>

### Adding packages to conda environments

A conda environment is usually populated by linking or unpacking the contents of conda packages. As
a result, the input data is a list of package records that need to be extracted and linked.
However, the user rarely specifies the list of package records directly. Instead, they usually ask
for a list of match specs, which is then turned into a list of package records by the tool. Once
a list of package records is available, the tool can proceed to download, extract, link and run all
the post-creation tasks.

#### From match specifications to package records

This is the most common way of interacting with conda environments. The user will provide a list
of match specifications and the tool will have to process that query to provide a list of package
records; usually by relying on a solver.

##### Default behaviour (no flags)

1. When a match specification is requested, the tool must be able to choose the most adequate
   package records for the requested package and its full dependency tree.
1. Package records can also include a `constrains` list. The solution needs to account for the
   relevant ones.
1. The solution of package records need to be optimized for the following criteria:
    * Prefer packages from channels higher in priority
    * Maximize their versions and build numbers
    * Minimize the number of `track_features` items
    * Prefer _arch_-specific packages over `noarch`
    * Maximize the timestamps, if needed
    * Minimize the total number of packages needed
1. The [`MatchSpec` syntax][matchspec-class] can be used to further constrain the packages that can
   be considered candidates for the solution.
1. If a match specification includes a channel, the corresponding package record must come from
   that channel.
   <!-- ^ JRG: What about their dependencies? I guess it's "unspecified"? -->
1. The explicitly requested match specifications must be recorded in `conda-meta/history`.
1. In already existing environments, solutions that minimize the number of changes to the installed
   packages are preferred by default. Conda's implementation achieves this by:
    * Minimizing the package record changes in the solver
    * Respecting the match specifications annotated in `conda-meta/history` as much as possible
1. If a package is marked as "pinned":
    * When a name-only match specification is requested:
      * The pinned specification takes precedence.
      * However, if the match specification is recorded in history, the history expression is used
        instead.
    * When the user explicitly requests a match specification with a different version, the
      user-specified match specification takes precedence, regardless the history contents.
1. Package names included in the "aggressive update list" are always added to the list of match
   specifications. In other words, the solver will always try to update them.

##### Subcommand-depending behaviour

1. The default behaviour detailed above is followed by `create` (new environments only) and
  `install` (new and existing environments).
1. The `update` subcommand has some particularities:
    * It can only operate on existing environments
    * It only accepts name-only specifications
    * It will always try to install the latest version available for the specified package name, if
      allowed by constraints of the environment. To do so, already installed packages might be
      updated. In constrast, `

##### Flag-depending behaviour

Flags that modify the list of match specifications passed to the solver:

* `--update-all`: All installed packages are added to the list of match specifications, with no
  version restraint.
* `--update-deps`: Dependencies of explicitly requested packages will be explicitly added to the
  list of match specifications.
* `--freeze-installed`, `--no-update-deps`: Packages already present in the environment will be
  included in the list of match specifications, pinned to their respective installed versions.
* `--no-pin`, `--ignore-pinned`: Packages marked as pinned will no longer receive any special
  treatment.

Flags that affect the returned solution only change the list of package records returned by the
solver:
* `--no-deps`: post-solve flag that will filter out the dependencies of the explicitly requested
  packages, leaving them unchanged in the environment if applicable.
* `--only-deps`: post-solve flag that will filter out the explicitly requested packages from the
  final solution, installing only the dependencies added by these, if applicable.


#### From package records to conda environment

##### Empty list

##### One or more package records

#### Post-creation tasks

<!------------------------------------>
<!-- Deletion of conda environments -->
<!------------------------------------>

### Deletion of conda environments

#### From package names

#### Forced removal

#### Post-deletion tasks

## References



## Copyright

All CEPs are explicitly [CC0 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

[conda-docs-environments]: https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/concepts/environments.html
[repodata-record]: https://github.com/conda/schemas/blob/master/repodata-record-1.schema.json
[packagerecord]: https://github.com/conda/conda/blob/4.13.0/conda/models/records.py
[matchspec-class]: https://github.com/conda/conda/blob/4.13.0/conda/models/match_spec.py#L69
