cep-recipe-tests.md, before:

# A new recipe format – part 5 - tests defined in the recipe

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> A new recipe format – part 5 - tests defined in the recipe </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Wolf Vollprecht &lt;wolf@prefix.dev&gt;</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Jun 12, 2024</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Jun 12, 2024</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda-incubator/ceps/pull/?? </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td>https://github.com/prefix-dev/rattler-build</td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

Testing is an important part of the packaging workflow - the goal is to make
sure that packages work correctly and package the files they are supposed to
contain.

In the CEP we want to clearly define how tests can be declared in the
`recipe.yaml` file and how they are stored in the final package.

## History

Conda-build has a (single) test section in the recipes. These tests are rendered
into the `info/test` folder of the package. The tests are rendered to a
`run_test.sh` or `run_test.bat` (shell) script, a `run_test.py` or `run_test.pl`
script for Python or Perl.

An `import` test is added to the `run_test.py` script.

Any additional test-time dependencies are added to a separata
`test_time_dependencies.json` file in the `info/test` folder. There is only a
single dependency list for all tests (making cross-compilation tests more
difficult).

There is also only a single test definition which means it's not easy to run
multiple (independent) tests (e.g. with different sets of requirements).

## Proposal

The new test section should be more flexible. Test definitions should be well
separated.

## Tests definition

With the exception of the package content tests, this is a recap of the previous
CEPs (CEP 14).

The recipes can contain a `tests` section that is a list of individual tests
that should be executed by the package build program after the package is built.

```yaml
tests:
  - script: # following the script definition in the CEP-14
      - echo "Hello World"
    requirements:
      build: # [MatchSpec]
        - ${{ "qemu" if target_platform != build_platform }}
      run: # [MatchSpec]
        - python
        - pytest # match spec
    files:
      # files to be copied to the package for test execution
      source: # GlobVec
        - tests/**
    # Additional files from the recipe directory
    #   recipe:
    #     - ...
  - python:
      imports: # [string]
        - foo # python imports to test
      pip_check: true # bool
  - package_contents:
      include: # [list of globs]
        - foo.h
        - foo.hpp
        - foo/*.hpp
  - downstream: bar # string
```

For `script`, `python` and `downstream` tests, please refer to CEP-14. The
`package_contents` test is a new test type that runs before package creation and
checks if the files listed are present (or not present) in the package.

## Test rendering to the final package

Tests should be shipped as part of the package in order to facilitate running
tests outside of the package build execution, and as part of e.g. downstream
tests.

For this reason, tests should be rendered as part of the package. However, the
rendered tests should still contain the original test definition including the
un-evaluated Jinja selectors and if/else sections - in order to facilitate
running tests in cross-compilation settings.

A build tool SHOULD render the list of tests into a JSON file in the `info/`
folder of the package. The file should be named `tests.json`. It should contain
a list of dictionaries, where each dictionary is a test definition.

- Any Jinja or conditionals should be kept intact and evaluated at runtime.
  (Question: should the list of tests be filtered? Should we introduce a `skip`
  key instead?)
- The package content tests are filtered as they are not executed at test-time
  but at build-time and we can assume that they already passed.
- The source files for the command tests are copied into the
  `/etc/conda/test-files/<package-identifier>/<index>/` folder and referenced
  from the `tests.json` file. This is done in order to keep the `info`-folder
  small for cases when only metadata is requested.

```js
[
  {
    script: ['echo "Hello World"'],
    requirements: {
      build: ["${{ 'qemu' if target_platform != build_platform }}"],
      run: ["python", "pytest", { if: "win", then: "pytest-windows" }],
    },
  },
  {
    python: {
      imports: ["foo"],
      pip_check: true,
    },
  },
  {
    downstream: "bar",
  },
];
```

### Test execution

#### Script test

A script test SHOULD create the `run` and `build` environment. The `build`
environment SHOULD be in the architecture of the current platform. The `run`
environment SHOULD be in the architecture of the target platform (ie. the
platform the package is intended to run on).

The `build` environment SHOULD be stacked on top of the `run` environment (ie.
the PATH entries of the `build` environment take precedence). The script MUST be
executed with the current work dir set to a temporary folder containing a copy
of the extra test files (from the
`$PREFIX/etc/conda/test-files/<package-identifier>/<id>/` folder). If there are
no extra test files and the folder does not exist, the current working directory
SHOULD be an empty folder.

#### Python test

For the Python test, a single test environment with the package should be
created. The package SHOULD depend on Python. If `pip_check` is set, `pip`
should be added as dependency to the test environment.

The import test SHOULD be executed with the test environment activated. A file
that includes each import statement SHOULD be created and executed. The test
SHOULD succeed if the file can be executed without error.

If `pip_check` is true, the test SHOULD also run `pip check` in the test
environment to ensure that the dependencies match the requirements of the
original Python package.

#### Downstream test

A downstream test SHOULD create a execute all tests of a downstream package with
the package to be tested. If dependency resolution for any of the tests fails
(e.g. due to conflicting dependencies), the test SHOULD be skipped.

The downstream test SHOULD then execute all tests from the downstream package in
separate test environments. The test SHOULD succeed if all tests pass. If any
test fails, the downstream test SHOULD fail.

## Package contents test

A list of `globs` is used to check for the presence (or absence) of files in the
package.

The full definition of a package content test is given below:

```yaml
package_contents:
  strict: bool
  include: TestGlobVec
  lib: TestGlobVec
  bin: TestGlobVec
  files: TestGlobVec
  site_packages: TestGlobVec
```

Where the `TestGlobVec` is defined as follows: either a single glob, a list of
globs or a dictionary with `exists` and `not_exists` keys, where the values are
list of globs.

For example:

```yaml
package_contents:
  include:
    - foo.h
    - foo.hpp
    - foo/*.hpp
  lib:
    exists:
      - libfoo.so
    not_exists:
      - libbar.so
```

This test MUST check if the files `foo.h`, `foo.hpp` and any files matching
`*.hpp` files are present in the package. It MUST also check if `libfoo.so` is
present MUST check that `libbar.so` is NOT present in the package.

### The `strict` flag

If the strict flag is set, all files included in the package MUST be matched by
at least one glob.

### The `lib` section

The `lib` section will look in the `$PREFIX/lib` folder on Unix and scan
multiple folders on Windows. A simple library name MUST be checked in multiple
ways (e.g. `foo`) - inspired by CMake `find_library` command.

#### Windows

Libraries are expected to be found in both .dll and .lib formats. Special
handling is required for .dll files, which must be accompanied by a
corresponding .bin file.

If the path extension of the glob is `.dll` or `lib`, we search for

- glob ends with `.dll`: `Library/bin/{glob}`
- glob ends with `.lib`: `Library/lib/{glob}`

If no extension is given, the dll/lib must be search in:

- `Library/bin/{glob}.dll`
- `Library/lib/{glob}.lib`

**Question Windows:** do we need to search in all $PATH entries for `.dll` files?

#### MacOS

On macOS the base directory that must be searched for libraries is `lib/`. If
the glob does not include `.a` or `.dylib`, the following variations are tried:

- `lib/{,lib}{glob}.dylib` (matches `foo.dylib`, `libfoo.dylib`)
- `lib/{,lib}{glob}.*.dylib` (matches `foo.1.dylib`, `libfoo.1.dylib`)

If the glob ends with `.a` or `.dylib`, the following variations are tried:

- `lib/{glob}`

#### Linux and WebAssembly

On Linux and WebAssembly the base directory that must be searched for libraries
is `lib/`. If the glob does not end with `.a` or `.so` and does not contain
`.so.`, the following variations are tried:

- `lib/{,lib}{glob}.so` (matches `foo.so`, `libfoo.so`)
- `lib/{,lib}{glob}.so.*` (matches `foo.so.1`, `libfoo.so.1`)

Otherwise, the following variations are tried:

- `lib/{glob}`

### The `bin` section

The `bin` section will look in the `$PREFIX/bin` folder on macOS, Linux and
WebAssembly.

On Windows, the build tool must search under the following folders, with the
following extensions. If a file extension is explictly given, only that
extension is searched for.

- extensions: `.exe`, `.bat`, `.com`, `.cmd`, `.ps1`
- folders:
  - `bin`
  - `Scripts`
  - `Library/bin`
  - `Library/usr/bin`
  - `Library/mingw-w64/bin`

For example, `foo` would match `Library/bin/foo.exe`.

For `noarch` Python packages this section will also look at the
`/python-scripts` folder in the package and entry-points.

### The `include` section

Globs in the include section should match files in the `$PREFIX/include` or
`$PREFIX/Library/include` (on Windows) folder. If no file extension is supplied,
`.h` and `.hpp` files must be matched.

### The `files` section

The `files` section will look in the `$PREFIX` folder for any globs that match.

### The site-packages section

The site packages section will look for globs in the
`$PREFIX/lib/pythonX.X/site-packages` (on Unix) or `$PREFIX/Lib/site-packages`
(on Windows) folder. For `noarch` packages it will look into the
`/site-packages` folder.

Commit message:

start list of env vars

cep-recipe-tests.md, after:

# A new recipe format – part 5 - tests defined in the recipe

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> A new recipe format – part 5 - tests defined in the recipe </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Wolf Vollprecht &lt;wolf@prefix.dev&gt;</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Jun 12, 2024</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Jun 12, 2024</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda-incubator/ceps/pull/?? </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td>https://github.com/prefix-dev/rattler-build</td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

Testing is an important part of the packaging workflow - the goal is to make
sure that packages work correctly and package the files they are supposed to
contain.

In the CEP we want to clearly define how tests can be declared in the
`recipe.yaml` file and how they are stored in the final package.

## History

Conda-build has a (single) test section in the recipes. These tests are rendered
into the `info/test` folder of the package. The tests are rendered to a
`run_test.sh` or `run_test.bat` (shell) script, a `run_test.py` or `run_test.pl`
script for Python or Perl.

An `import` test is added to the `run_test.py` script.

Any additional test-time dependencies are added to a separata
`test_time_dependencies.json` file in the `info/test` folder. There is only a
single dependency list for all tests (making cross-compilation tests more
difficult).

There is also only a single test definition which means it's not easy to run
multiple (independent) tests (e.g. with different sets of requirements).

## Proposal

The new test section should be more flexible. Test definitions should be well
separated.

## Tests definition

With the exception of the package content tests, this is a recap of the previous
CEPs (CEP 14).

The recipes can contain a `tests` section that is a list of individual tests
that should be executed by the package build program after the package is built.

```yaml
tests:
  - script: # following the script definition in the CEP-14
      - echo "Hello World"
    requirements:
      build: # [MatchSpec]
        - ${{ "qemu" if target_platform != build_platform }}
      run: # [MatchSpec]
        - python
        - pytest # match spec
    files:
      # files to be copied to the package for test execution
      source: # GlobVec
        - tests/**
    # Additional files from the recipe directory
    #   recipe:
    #     - ...
  - python:
      imports: # [string]
        - foo # python imports to test
      pip_check: true # bool
  - package_contents:
      include: # [list of globs]
        - foo.h
        - foo.hpp
        - foo/*.hpp
  - downstream: bar # string
```

For `script`, `python` and `downstream` tests, please refer to CEP-14. The
`package_contents` test is a new test type that runs before package creation and
checks if the files listed are present (or not present) in the package.

## Test rendering to the final package

Tests should be shipped as part of the package in order to facilitate running
tests outside of the package build execution, and as part of e.g. downstream
tests.

For this reason, tests should be rendered as part of the package. However, the
rendered tests should still contain the original test definition including the
un-evaluated Jinja selectors and if/else sections - in order to facilitate
running tests in cross-compilation settings.

A build tool SHOULD render the list of tests into a JSON file in the `info/`
folder of the package. The file should be named `tests.json`. It should contain
a list of dictionaries, where each dictionary is a test definition.

- Any Jinja or conditionals should be kept intact and evaluated at runtime.
  (Question: should the list of tests be filtered? Should we introduce a `skip`
  key instead?)
- The package content tests are filtered as they are not executed at test-time
  but at build-time and we can assume that they already passed.
- The source files for the command tests are copied into the
  `/etc/conda/test-files/<package-identifier>/<index>/` folder and referenced
  from the `tests.json` file. This is done in order to keep the `info`-folder
  small for cases when only metadata is requested.

```js
[
  {
    script: ['echo "Hello World"'],
    requirements: {
      build: ["${{ 'qemu' if target_platform != build_platform }}"],
      run: ["python", "pytest", { if: "win", then: "pytest-windows" }],
    },
  },
  {
    python: {
      imports: ["foo"],
      pip_check: true,
    },
  },
  {
    downstream: "bar",
  },
];
```

### Test execution

#### Script test

A script test SHOULD create the `run` and `build` environment. The `build`
environment SHOULD be in the architecture of the current platform. The `run`
environment SHOULD be in the architecture of the target platform (ie. the
platform the package is intended to run on).

The `build` environment SHOULD be stacked on top of the `run` environment (ie.
the PATH entries of the `build` environment take precedence). The script MUST be
executed with the current work dir set to a temporary folder containing a copy
of the extra test files (from the
`$PREFIX/etc/conda/test-files/<package-identifier>/<id>/` folder). If there are
no extra test files and the folder does not exist, the current working directory
SHOULD be an empty folder.

#### Python test

For the Python test, a single test environment with the package should be
created. The package SHOULD depend on Python. If `pip_check` is set, `pip`
should be added as dependency to the test environment.

The import test SHOULD be executed with the test environment activated. A file
that includes each import statement SHOULD be created and executed. The test
SHOULD succeed if the file can be executed without error.

If `pip_check` is true, the test SHOULD also run `pip check` in the test
environment to ensure that the dependencies match the requirements of the
original Python package.

The following environment variables SHOULD be set:

- `PKG_NAME` - the name of the package
- `PKG_VERSION` - the version of the package
- `PKG_BUILDNUM` - the build number of the package
- `PKG_BUILD_STRING` - the build number of the package
- `PREFIX` - the prefix where the package is installed
- (TODO: complete this list)

Note: `PKG_HASH` is removed because it can't be easily extracted from `index.json`

#### Downstream test

A downstream test SHOULD create a execute all tests of a downstream package with
the package to be tested. If dependency resolution for any of the tests fails
(e.g. due to conflicting dependencies), the test SHOULD be skipped.

The downstream test SHOULD then execute all tests from the downstream package in
separate test environments. The test SHOULD succeed if all tests pass. If any
test fails, the downstream test SHOULD fail.

## Package contents test

A list of `globs` is used to check for the presence (or absence) of files in the
package.

The full definition of a package content test is given below:

```yaml
package_contents:
  strict: bool
  include: TestGlobVec
  lib: TestGlobVec
  bin: TestGlobVec
  files: TestGlobVec
  site_packages: TestGlobVec
```

Where the `TestGlobVec` is defined as follows: either a single glob, a list of
globs or a dictionary with `exists` and `not_exists` keys, where the values are
list of globs.

For example:

```yaml
package_contents:
  include:
    - foo.h
    - foo.hpp
    - foo/*.hpp
  lib:
    exists:
      - libfoo.so
    not_exists:
      - libbar.so
```

This test MUST check if the files `foo.h`, `foo.hpp` and any files matching
`*.hpp` files are present in the package. It MUST also check if `libfoo.so` is
present MUST check that `libbar.so` is NOT present in the package.

### The `strict` flag

If the strict flag is set, all files included in the package MUST be matched by
at least one glob.

### The `lib` section

The `lib` section will look in the `$PREFIX/lib` folder on Unix and scan
multiple folders on Windows. A simple library name MUST be checked in multiple
ways (e.g. `foo`) - inspired by CMake `find_library` command.

#### Windows

Libraries are expected to be found in both .dll and .lib formats. Special
handling is required for .dll files, which must be accompanied by a
corresponding .bin file.

If the path extension of the glob is `.dll` or `lib`, we search for

- glob ends with `.dll`: `Library/bin/{glob}`
- glob ends with `.lib`: `Library/lib/{glob}`

If no extension is given, the dll/lib must be search in:

- `Library/bin/{glob}.dll`
- `Library/lib/{glob}.lib`

**Question Windows:** do we need to search in all $PATH entries for `.dll` files?

#### MacOS

On macOS the base directory that must be searched for libraries is `lib/`. If
the glob does not include `.a` or `.dylib`, the following variations are tried:

- `lib/{,lib}{glob}.dylib` (matches `foo.dylib`, `libfoo.dylib`)
- `lib/{,lib}{glob}.*.dylib` (matches `foo.1.dylib`, `libfoo.1.dylib`)

If the glob ends with `.a` or `.dylib`, the following variations are tried:

- `lib/{glob}`

#### Linux and WebAssembly

On Linux and WebAssembly the base directory that must be searched for libraries
is `lib/`. If the glob does not end with `.a` or `.so` and does not contain
`.so.`, the following variations are tried:

- `lib/{,lib}{glob}.so` (matches `foo.so`, `libfoo.so`)
- `lib/{,lib}{glob}.so.*` (matches `foo.so.1`, `libfoo.so.1`)

Otherwise, the following variations are tried:

- `lib/{glob}`

### The `bin` section

The `bin` section will look in the `$PREFIX/bin` folder on macOS, Linux and
WebAssembly.

On Windows, the build tool must search under the following folders, with the
following extensions. If a file extension is explictly given, only that
extension is searched for.

- extensions: `.exe`, `.bat`, `.com`, `.cmd`, `.ps1`
- folders:
  - `bin`
  - `Scripts`
  - `Library/bin`
  - `Library/usr/bin`
  - `Library/mingw-w64/bin`

For example, `foo` would match `Library/bin/foo.exe`.

For `noarch` Python packages this section will also look at the
`/python-scripts` folder in the package and entry-points.

### The `include` section

Globs in the include section should match files in the `$PREFIX/include` or
`$PREFIX/Library/include` (on Windows) folder. If no file extension is supplied,
`.h` and `.hpp` files must be matched.

### The `files` section

The `files` section will look in the `$PREFIX` folder for any globs that match.

### The site-packages section

The site packages section will look for globs in the
`$PREFIX/lib/pythonX.X/site-packages` (on Unix) or `$PREFIX/Lib/site-packages`
(on Windows) folder. For `noarch` packages it will look into the
`/site-packages` folder.
