cep-XXXX.md, before:

# CEP XXXX - Names in conda packages and channels

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> CEP XXXX - Names in conda packages and channels </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> 
  Jaime Rodríguez-Guerra &lt;jaime.rogue@gmail.com&gt; <br />
  Matthew R. Becker &lt;becker.mr@gmail.com&gt; <br />
  Cheng H. Lee &lt;clee@anaconda.com&gt;
</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Mar 11, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Mar 30, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/116 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> N/A </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

This CEP aims to standardize names and other strings used to identify packages, artifacts and
channels in the conda ecosystem.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in [RFC2119][RFC2119] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

More specifically, violations of a MUST or MUST NOT rule MUST result in an error. Violations of the
rules specified by any of the other all-capital terms MAY result in a warning, at discretion of the
implementation.

### Identifying package artifacts

The conda ecosystem distinguishes between two types of packages:

- Distributable package names: represented by a concrete, downloadable, extractable conda artifact.
- Virtual package names: not backed by any physical artifact. They only exist on the client side.

#### Package names

A distributable package name MUST only consist of lowercase ASCII letters, numbers, hyphens, periods
and underscores. It MUST start with a letter, a number, or a single underscore. It MUST NOT include
two consecutive separators (hyphen, period, underscore).

Virtual package names MUST only consist of lowercase ASCII letters, numbers, hyphens, periods and
underscores. They MUST NOT use two consecutive separators, with one exception: they MUST start with
two underscores.

This means that distributable package names MUST match the following case-insensitive
regex: `^(([a-z0-9])|([a-z0-9_](?!_)))[._-]?([a-z0-9]+(\.|-|_|$))*$`.

Virtual package names MUST follow this regex: `^__[a-z0-9][._-]?([a-z0-9]+(\.|-|_|$))*$`.

In all cases, the maximum length of a package name MUST NOT exceed 64 characters.

#### Version strings

Version strings MUST only consist of digits, periods, lowercase ASCII letters, underscores, plus
symbols, and exclamation marks. Additional rules apply but are out of scope in this CEP and will be
discussed separately.

The maximum length of a version string MUST NOT exceed 64 characters.

#### Build strings

Builds strings MUST only consist of ASCII letters, numbers, periods, plus symbols, and underscores.
They MUST match this regex `^[a-zA-Z0-9_\.+]+$`.

The maximum length of a build string MUST NOT exceed 64 characters.

#### Artifact extensions

Artifact extensions MUST only consist of lowercase ASCII letters, numbers and periods. They must start
and end with a letter or a number. They MUST NOT include two consecutive periods. They MUST match this
regex `^[a-z0-9](\.?[a-z0-9])*$`.

The maximum length of a file extension MUST NOT exceed 16 characters.

> The conda ecosystem currently recognizes two artifact extensions: `tar.bz2` and `conda`, versioned
`v1` and `v2` respectively.

#### Filenames

Distributable conda artifacts MUST have a filename following this scheme:

```text
<package name>-<version string>-<build string>.<extension>
```

The maximum length of a filename MUST NOT exceed 192 characters.

Virtual conda packages do not exist on disk and SHOULD NOT need filename standardization.

#### Distribution strings

A "distribution string" MAY be used to identify a package artifact without specifying the extension
or the channel. It MUST match the following syntax:

```text
<package name>-<version string>-<build string>
```

Distribution strings apply to both distributable and virtual packages. They are used as the name of the
directories where artifacts are extracted in the package cache, for example.

> Note: Despite the similarity, distribution strings are not `MatchSpec`-like specifiers and
> MUST NOT be used as such.

### Identifying channels

A conda channel is defined as a URL where one can find one or more `repodata.json` files arranged in one
subdirectory (_subdir_) each. `noarch/repodata.json` MUST be present to consider the parent location a channel.

#### Channel base URLs and names

The base URL for the arbitrary location of a repodata file is defined as:

```text
<scheme>://[<authority>][/<path>/][/label/<label name>]/<subdir>/repodata.json
```

with `<scheme>`, `<authority>` and `<path>` defined by [RFC
3986](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-3.2).

Taken the channel definition above, the base URL without trailing slashes is thus:

```text
<scheme>://[<authority>][/<path>/][/label/<label name>]
```

For example, given `https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/noarch/repodata.json`, the part leading
to `noarch/repodata.json` and thus base URL is `https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/conda-forge`. For
local repodata such as `file:///home/username/channel/noarch/repodata.json`, the
channel base URL is `file:///home/username/channel`.

For convenience, the channel _name_ is defined as the concatenation of `scheme`, `authority` and
`path` components. The `<scheme>://` part MAY be omitted if `scheme` is one of `http`, `https` or
`file`. At least one of `authority` or `path` SHOULD be present. In their absence, the channel name
MUST be considered empty, regardless the scheme. Empty channel names SHOULD NOT be used.

When present, each path component MUST only contain lowercase ASCII letters, numbers, underscores,
periods, and dashes. They MUST NOT start with a period or a dash. They SHOULD start and end with a
letter or a number. If present, each path component MUST match this regex:

```re
^[a-z0-9_][a-z0-9_.-]*$
```

The maximum length of an individual path component in a channel base URL MUST NOT exceed 128 characters.
The maximum length of a channel base URL SHOULD NOT exceed 256 characters.

#### Subdir names

Channel subdir names MUST either be the literal `noarch` or a string following the syntax `{os}-{arch}`,
where `{os}` and `{arch}` MUST only consist of lowercase ASCII letters and numbers. Non-`noarch` subdirs
MUST match this regex: `^[a-z0-9]+-[a-z0-9]+$`.

The maximum length of a subdir name MUST NOT exceed 32 characters.

#### Label names

Channel label names MUST only consist of ASCII letters, digits, underscores, hyphens, forward slashes,
periods, colons and whitespace. They MUST start with a letter. They MUST match this regex:
`^[a-zA-Z][0-9a-zA-Z_\-\.\/:\s]*`. Even if allowed, label names SHOULD NOT contain any whitespace.

The label `nolabel` is reserved and MUST only be used for conda packages which have no other labels.
In other words, in the space of labels, the empty set is represented by the labels `nolabel`.

The maximum length of a label name MUST NOT exceed 128 characters.

## Backwards compatibility

The conda subdir and package name regexes are backwards compatible with the current `conda` implementation
(25.3) and all existing packages on the `defaults` and `conda-forge` channels, except for the
`__anaconda_core_depends` package on the `defaults` channel. See
[this comment](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/116#discussion_r1992234677).

The regex for labels was pulled from an anaconda.org error message describing the set of valid labels.

As of 2025-03-12T19:00Z, of the ~1.9M channel names on anaconda.org:

- 7,219 violate the regex `^[a-z0-9]+((-|_|.)[a-z0-9]+)*$`;
- 98 violate the regex `^[a-z0-9][a-z0-9_.-]*$` (allowing channel names to end with `_`, `.`, or `-`); and
- 6 violate `^[a-z0-9_][a-z0-9_.-]*$` (allowing channel names to start with `_`).
  Of those six, five start with `.`, and the other starts with `~`.

See [this comment](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/116#discussion_r1992154574) for more details.
The authors have excluded the channel names in the last case that start with `.` or `~` given possible
security implications. A low percentage, ~0.4%, of channels do not match the recommendations for channel
names above, but are allowed.

The maximum lengths allowed for the different fields have been chosen so the resulting path components
(directory names, filenames) comfortably fit in a the 255-char maximum limit some filesystems impose.
As of 2025-03-01T13:00Z, there are no violations of these limits in any of the packages published for
`conda-forge`, `bioconda` and `defaults`. See
[this comment](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/116#issuecomment-2763392999) and
[this comment](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/116#issuecomment-2759130187) for more details.

## Copyright

All CEPs are explicitly [CC0 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

<!-- links -->

[RFC2119]: https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt

Commit message:

add exception for file:// channels

cep-XXXX.md, after:

# CEP XXXX - Names in conda packages and channels

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> CEP XXXX - Names in conda packages and channels </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> 
  Jaime Rodríguez-Guerra &lt;jaime.rogue@gmail.com&gt; <br />
  Matthew R. Becker &lt;becker.mr@gmail.com&gt; <br />
  Cheng H. Lee &lt;clee@anaconda.com&gt;
</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Mar 11, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Mar 30, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/116 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> N/A </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

This CEP aims to standardize names and other strings used to identify packages, artifacts and
channels in the conda ecosystem.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in [RFC2119][RFC2119] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

More specifically, violations of a MUST or MUST NOT rule MUST result in an error. Violations of the
rules specified by any of the other all-capital terms MAY result in a warning, at discretion of the
implementation.

### Identifying package artifacts

The conda ecosystem distinguishes between two types of packages:

- Distributable package names: represented by a concrete, downloadable, extractable conda artifact.
- Virtual package names: not backed by any physical artifact. They only exist on the client side.

#### Package names

A distributable package name MUST only consist of lowercase ASCII letters, numbers, hyphens, periods
and underscores. It MUST start with a letter, a number, or a single underscore. It MUST NOT include
two consecutive separators (hyphen, period, underscore).

Virtual package names MUST only consist of lowercase ASCII letters, numbers, hyphens, periods and
underscores. They MUST NOT use two consecutive separators, with one exception: they MUST start with
two underscores.

This means that distributable package names MUST match the following case-insensitive
regex: `^(([a-z0-9])|([a-z0-9_](?!_)))[._-]?([a-z0-9]+(\.|-|_|$))*$`.

Virtual package names MUST follow this regex: `^__[a-z0-9][._-]?([a-z0-9]+(\.|-|_|$))*$`.

In all cases, the maximum length of a package name MUST NOT exceed 64 characters.

#### Version strings

Version strings MUST only consist of digits, periods, lowercase ASCII letters, underscores, plus
symbols, and exclamation marks. Additional rules apply but are out of scope in this CEP and will be
discussed separately.

The maximum length of a version string MUST NOT exceed 64 characters.

#### Build strings

Builds strings MUST only consist of ASCII letters, numbers, periods, plus symbols, and underscores.
They MUST match this regex `^[a-zA-Z0-9_\.+]+$`.

The maximum length of a build string MUST NOT exceed 64 characters.

#### Artifact extensions

Artifact extensions MUST only consist of lowercase ASCII letters, numbers and periods. They must start
and end with a letter or a number. They MUST NOT include two consecutive periods. They MUST match this
regex `^[a-z0-9](\.?[a-z0-9])*$`.

The maximum length of a file extension MUST NOT exceed 16 characters.

> The conda ecosystem currently recognizes two artifact extensions: `tar.bz2` and `conda`, versioned
`v1` and `v2` respectively.

#### Filenames

Distributable conda artifacts MUST have a filename following this scheme:

```text
<package name>-<version string>-<build string>.<extension>
```

The maximum length of a filename MUST NOT exceed 192 characters.

Virtual conda packages do not exist on disk and SHOULD NOT need filename standardization.

#### Distribution strings

A "distribution string" MAY be used to identify a package artifact without specifying the extension
or the channel. It MUST match the following syntax:

```text
<package name>-<version string>-<build string>
```

Distribution strings apply to both distributable and virtual packages. They are used as the name of the
directories where artifacts are extracted in the package cache, for example.

> Note: Despite the similarity, distribution strings are not `MatchSpec`-like specifiers and
> MUST NOT be used as such.

### Identifying channels

A conda channel is defined as a URL where one can find one or more `repodata.json` files arranged in one
subdirectory (_subdir_) each. `noarch/repodata.json` MUST be present to consider the parent location a channel.

#### Channel base URLs and names

The base URL for the arbitrary location of a repodata file is defined as:

```text
<scheme>://[<authority>][/<path>/][/label/<label name>]/<subdir>/repodata.json
```

with `<scheme>`, `<authority>` and `<path>` defined by [RFC
3986](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-3.2).

Taken the channel definition above, the base URL without trailing slashes is thus:

```text
<scheme>://[<authority>][/<path>/][/label/<label name>]
```

For example, given `https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/noarch/repodata.json`, the part leading
to `noarch/repodata.json` and thus base URL is `https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge`. For
local repodata such as `file:///home/username/channel/noarch/repodata.json`, the
channel base URL is `file:///home/username/channel`.

For convenience, the channel _name_ is defined as the concatenation of `scheme`, `authority` and
`path` components. The `<scheme>://` part MAY be omitted if `scheme` is one of `http`, `https` or
`file`. At least one of `authority` or `path` SHOULD be present. In their absence, the channel name
MUST be considered empty, regardless the scheme. Empty channel names SHOULD NOT be used.

When present, each path component MUST only contain lowercase ASCII letters, numbers, underscores,
periods, and dashes. They MUST NOT start with a period or a dash. They SHOULD start and end with a
letter or a number. If present, each path component MUST match this regex:

```re
^[a-z0-9_][a-z0-9_.-]*$
```

For `file://`-based channel URLs, the path component rules MAY be understood as recommendations only.

The maximum length of an individual path component in a channel base URL MUST NOT exceed 128 characters.
The maximum length of a channel base URL SHOULD NOT exceed 256 characters.

#### Subdir names

Channel subdir names MUST either be the literal `noarch` or a string following the syntax `{os}-{arch}`,
where `{os}` and `{arch}` MUST only consist of lowercase ASCII letters and numbers. Non-`noarch` subdirs
MUST match this regex: `^[a-z0-9]+-[a-z0-9]+$`.

The maximum length of a subdir name MUST NOT exceed 32 characters.

#### Label names

Channel label names MUST only consist of ASCII letters, digits, underscores, hyphens, forward slashes,
periods, and whitespace. They MUST start with a letter. They MUST match this regex:
`^[a-zA-Z][0-9a-zA-Z_\-\.\/\s]*`. Even if allowed, label names SHOULD NOT contain any whitespace.

The label `nolabel` is reserved and MUST only be used for conda packages which have no other labels.
In other words, in the space of labels, the empty set is represented by the labels `nolabel`.

The maximum length of a label name MUST NOT exceed 128 characters.

## Backwards compatibility

The conda subdir and package name regexes are backwards compatible with the current `conda` implementation
(25.3) and all existing packages on the `defaults` and `conda-forge` channels, except for the
`__anaconda_core_depends` package on the `defaults` channel. See
[this comment](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/116#discussion_r1992234677).

The regex for labels was pulled from an anaconda.org error message describing the set of valid labels.

As of 2025-03-12T19:00Z, of the ~1.9M channel names on anaconda.org:

- 7,219 violate the regex `^[a-z0-9]+((-|_|.)[a-z0-9]+)*$`;
- 98 violate the regex `^[a-z0-9][a-z0-9_.-]*$` (allowing channel names to end with `_`, `.`, or `-`); and
- 6 violate `^[a-z0-9_][a-z0-9_.-]*$` (allowing channel names to start with `_`).
  Of those six, five start with `.`, and the other starts with `~`.

See [this comment](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/116#discussion_r1992154574) for more details.
The authors have excluded the channel names in the last case that start with `.` or `~` given possible
security implications. A low percentage, ~0.4%, of channels do not match the recommendations for channel
names above, but are allowed.

The maximum lengths allowed for the different fields have been chosen so the resulting path components
(directory names, filenames) comfortably fit in a the 255-char maximum limit some filesystems impose.
As of 2025-03-01T13:00Z, there are no violations of these limits in any of the packages published for
`conda-forge`, `bioconda` and `defaults`. See
[this comment](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/116#issuecomment-2763392999) and
[this comment](https://github.com/conda/ceps/pull/116#issuecomment-2759130187) for more details.

## Copyright

All CEPs are explicitly [CC0 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

<!-- links -->

[RFC2119]: https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt
