cep-sigstore-predicate.md, before:

# CEP - Standardizing a publish attestation for the conda ecosystem

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> Standardizing a publish attestation for the conda ecosystem </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Proposed </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Wolf Vollprecht &lt;wolf@prefix.dev&gt;</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Feb 18, 2025 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Feb 18, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td>  </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td>  </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

This CEP proposes a standard attestation layout for the conda ecosystem.
This attestation layout is based on the [in-toto] framework
and will enable further integration with signing schemes like
[Sigstore].

## Definitions and Concepts

- An **attestation** is a machine-readable cryptographically signed statement.
  When an attestation's signature is verified against a trusted key, that
  verification provides integrity and authenticity guarantees about the
  attestation's subject. For example:

    - Alice is the maintainer of the `widgets` package.
    - Alice signs a machine readable statement equivalent to the following
      English sentence, producing her attestation:

        > Alice published the `widgets` package at version v1.2.3 with
        > hash `sha256:abcd...` to the `conda-forge` channel.

    - Bob establishes trust in Alice's public key.
    - Bob can verify the attestation's signature against Alice's public key,
      giving him confidence that the statement is true.
    - Correspondingly, Bob can reject any statement for `widgets` that is not
      signed by Alice's public key.

- [in-toto] is a framework and standard for defining attestations.

    - Within in-toto, an attestation's statement is composed of a
      **subject** and a **predicate**. The subject is the resource
      (or resources) being attested to, and the predicate is a
      an arbitrary collection of metadata about the subject.
      The predicate is identified by a **predicate type**,
      which defines the predicate's expected schema.

- [Sigstore] is a project that enables misuse-resistant software signing
  and verification via short-lived certificates and a tamper-evident log.
  Sigstore composes with attestation frameworks like in-toto to provide
  transparency and misuse-resistance properties on top of the integrity
  and authenticity properties of attestations.

   One of Sigstore's major misuse-resistance contributions is
   the use of *ephemeral keys* for signing. Modifying the example above:

   - Instead of maintaining a long-lived signing key, Alice generates an
     *ephemeral key* and binds it to her *identity*
     ("`alice@trustme.example.com`").

     This binding is done via a certificate issued by [Fulcio], which verifies a
     *proof of possession* (such as from [OpenID Connect]) from Alice for her
     claimant identity. The certificate issued by Fulcio is, in turn auditable
     via [RFC 6962] Certificate Transparency (CT) logs.

    - Alice signs her attestation with her ephemeral key, and distributes a
      "bundle" containing both her attestation and her signing certificate.

    - Instead of establishing trust a long-lived key from Alice, Bob establishes
      trust in Alice's identity.

    - Bob can verify the attestation's signature against Alice's emphemeral key,
      which in turn can be verified as authentically Alice's via the Fulcio-
      issued certificate.

    With this flow, neither Alice nor Bob needs to maintain long-lived signing
    or verifying keyrings, in turn reducing the attacker surface for key
    compromise.

  Another key misuse-resistance contribution within Sigstore is *machine
  identities*. A machine identity behaves similarly to a human identity
  (Alice or Bob), but identifies a machine instead of a human. For example,
  `github.com/example/example/.github/workflows/release.yml@refs/tags/v1.2.3`
  could be the machine identity of a GitHub Actions workflow that ran from
  `release.yml` within `example/example` against the `v1.2.3` tag.

## Motivation

The conda ecosystem contains metadata that answers the following questions,
in part or in full:

* _Who_ (or _what_) published this package?
* _What_ is the package's hash?
* _Where_ was this package _published from_, and where _to_?
* _When_ was this package published?

However, this metadata is not currently **cryptographically verifiable**:
the consuming party must either trust it as presented, or verify it manually
against independent sources of truth (such as a project's release history).

Attestations that present this metadata in a cryptographically
verifiable manner are desirable for a number of reasons:

* Package maintainers wish to demonstrate the integrity and authenticity
  of their package uploads;
* Individual downstream users wish to verify the integrity and authenticity of
  packages they consume, without placing additional trust in the
  channel or channel's hosting server;
* Attestations change the sophistication and risk profile for attackers in
  defenders' favor: the attacker must be sufficiently sophisticated
  to access private key material, *and* have a risk tolerance profile that
  accepts exposure via auditable transparency logs.

More broadly, attestation schemes like the one proposed in this CEP have
seen adoption in similar and related ecosystems:

* Python (PyPA/PyPI): [PEP 740] and [PyPI - Attestations]
* NodeJS (npm): [npm - Generating provenance statements]
* Ruby (RubyGems): [rubygems/release-gem]

## Specification

### Attestation format

This CEP proposes the following attestation statement layout, using the
[in-toto Statement schema]:

- `predicateType` **MUST** be `https://schemas.conda.org/publish-v1.json`
- `subject` **MUST** be a single [`ResourceDescriptor`], with the following
  constraints:
    - `subject[0].name` **MUST** be the full filename of the conda package
      that will be part of the `repodata.json` and under which it will appear on
      the server.
    - `subject[0].digest` **MUST** be a [`DigestSet`], and it **MUST** contain
      a single `sha256` entry with the SHA256 hash of the conda package.
- `predicate` **MAY** be present. If present and not `null`, it **MUST** be a
  JSON object with the following fields:
    - `targetChannel` **MUST** be a string, indicating where the package
      is being uploaded to. This field **MUST** be a valid URL with no
      trailing slashes.

An example of a compliant statement is provided below:

```json
{
    "_type": "https://in-toto.io/Statement/v0.1",
    "subject": [{
        "name": "file-name-0.0.1-h123456_5.conda",
        "digest": {"sha256": "01ba4719c80b6fe911b091a7c05124b64eeece964e09c058ef8f9805daca546b"},
    }],
    "predicateType": "https://schemas.conda.org/publish-v1.json",
    "predicate": {
        "targetChannel": "https://prefix.dev/conda-forge",
    }
}
```

### Signing and distributing

This CEP recommends the following signing process:

1. The signer (i.e. Alice or Alice's trusted machine identity) uses a
   [Sigstore]-compatible client to generate an ephemeral keypair and bind it to
   their identity via a public certificate.
2. The signer generates an in-toto statement as described above, and
   produces an attestation by signing that statement with their ephemeral
   private key.
3. The signer uploads their attestation to the Sigstore transparency log
   as a [DSSE] envelope.
4. The signer produces a [Sigstore bundle] containing their certificate,
   attestation, and transparency log inclusion proof.

Each of these steps is performed transparently by a Sigstore client like
[sigstore-python], except for step (2) as it concerns the specific
layout of the signed-over statement.

The result of this process is a single Sigstore bundle, which can be
distributed alongside the conda package or otherwise made discoverable.

This CEP does not proscribe a distribution mechanism.

### Verifying

This CEP recommends the following verification process:

1. The verifier retrieves Alice's conda package and associated
   Sigstore bundle.
1. The verifier performs a standard Sigstore verification process against
   the bundle, using Alice's identity (or machine identity) as the
   signing identity. This process produces a verified in-toto statement.

   This step requires the verifier to establish trust in the identity
   being verified against.

   Exact mechanisms for establishing this trust are
   outside the scope of this CEP. However, one option is a TOFU (trust on first
   use) scheme with an attestation-aware conda channel, where package names
   are "locked" to attesting identities on first use, with subsequent updates
   being verified against that identity.

1. The verifier checks the in-toto statement for consistency against their
   ground truth:

   - The `predicateType` field **MUST** be `https://schemas.conda.org/publish-v1.json`.
   - The `subject[0].name` field **MUST** match the filename of the conda package.
   - The `subject[0].digest` field **MUST** match the SHA256 hash of the conda
     package.
   - The `predicate.targetChannel` field **SHOULD** match the channel that
     the package was retrieved from, if `predicate` is present. However, the
     verifier **MAY** choose to allow a channel mismatch, e.g. if the known
     context is a mirroring context (where the conda package was originally
     published to a different channel, but is now being consumed from
     a mirror).

At the end of this process, the verifier is confident in the following facts:

- The package was published by the signer (Alice or Alice's machine identity).
  - If the publisher is a machine identity, this further establishes source
    provenance via the machine identity's claims. See [Sigstore OID information]
    for additional information on these claims.
- The package is authentic and integral modulo trust in the signer.

## Discussion

This predicate adds basic verifiable facts about the package. It will tie the
producer of the package to the target channel. This is similar to what PyPI has
implemented with the [PyPI publish
attestation](https://docs.pypi.org/attestations/publish/v1/). Since there is no
single authoritative index in the Conda world, we add the `targetChannel` field
to reach parity.

On the server, the certificate should be tested against the Trusted Publisher
used to upload the certificate to establish a chain of trust.

## Future work

Once sigstore attestations are established and more research has been done, we
might want to use the [SLSA (Supply-chain Levels for Software
Artifacts)](https://slsa.dev) spec as base for predicates in the conda
ecosystem.

[in-toto]: https://in-toto.io
[Sigstore]: https://sigstore.dev
[Fulcio]: https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio
[RFC 6962]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6962
[OpenID Connect]: https://openid.net/connect/
[PEP 740]: https://peps.python.org/pep-0740/
[PyPI - Attestations]: https://docs.pypi.org/attestations/
[npm - Generating provenance statements]: https://docs.npmjs.com/generating-provenance-statements
[rubygems/release-gem]: https://github.com/rubygems/release-gem
[in-toto Statement schema]: https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/v1/statement.md
[`ResourceDescriptor`]: https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/v1/resource_descriptor.md
[`DigestSet`]: https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/v1/digest_set.md
[DSSE]: https://github.com/secure-systems-lab/dsse/blob/master/envelope.md
[Sigstore bundle]: https://docs.sigstore.dev/about/bundle/
[sigstore-python]: https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-python
[Sigstore OID information]: https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio/blob/main/docs/oid-info.md

Commit message:

draft: more details on distribution mechanisms
Signed-off-by: William Woodruff <william@trailofbits.com>

cep-sigstore-predicate.md, after:

# CEP - Standardizing a publish attestation for the conda ecosystem

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> Standardizing a publish attestation for the conda ecosystem </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Proposed </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Wolf Vollprecht &lt;wolf@prefix.dev&gt;</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Feb 18, 2025 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Feb 18, 2025</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td>  </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td>  </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

This CEP proposes a standard attestation layout for the conda ecosystem.
This attestation layout is based on the [in-toto] framework
and will enable further integration with signing schemes like
[Sigstore].

## Definitions and Concepts

- An **attestation** is a machine-readable cryptographically signed statement.
  When an attestation's signature is verified against a trusted key, that
  verification provides integrity and authenticity guarantees about the
  attestation's subject. For example:

    - Alice is the maintainer of the `widgets` package.
    - Alice signs a machine readable statement equivalent to the following
      English sentence, producing her attestation:

        > Alice published the `widgets` package at version v1.2.3 with
        > hash `sha256:abcd...` to the `conda-forge` channel.

    - Bob establishes trust in Alice's public key.
    - Bob can verify the attestation's signature against Alice's public key,
      giving him confidence that the statement is true.
    - Correspondingly, Bob can reject any statement for `widgets` that is not
      signed by Alice's public key.

- [in-toto] is a framework and standard for defining attestations.

    - Within in-toto, an attestation's statement is composed of a
      **subject** and a **predicate**. The subject is the resource
      (or resources) being attested to, and the predicate is a
      an arbitrary collection of metadata about the subject.
      The predicate is identified by a **predicate type**,
      which defines the predicate's expected schema.

- [Sigstore] is a project that enables misuse-resistant software signing
  and verification via short-lived certificates and a tamper-evident log.
  Sigstore composes with attestation frameworks like in-toto to provide
  transparency and misuse-resistance properties on top of the integrity
  and authenticity properties of attestations.

   One of Sigstore's major misuse-resistance contributions is
   the use of *ephemeral keys* for signing. Modifying the example above:

   - Instead of maintaining a long-lived signing key, Alice generates an
     *ephemeral key* and binds it to her *identity*
     ("`alice@trustme.example.com`").

     This binding is done via a certificate issued by [Fulcio], which verifies a
     *proof of possession* (such as from [OpenID Connect]) from Alice for her
     claimant identity. The certificate issued by Fulcio is, in turn auditable
     via [RFC 6962] Certificate Transparency (CT) logs.

    - Alice signs her attestation with her ephemeral key, and distributes a
      "bundle" containing both her attestation and her signing certificate.

    - Instead of establishing trust a long-lived key from Alice, Bob establishes
      trust in Alice's identity.

    - Bob can verify the attestation's signature against Alice's emphemeral key,
      which in turn can be verified as authentically Alice's via the Fulcio-
      issued certificate.

    With this flow, neither Alice nor Bob needs to maintain long-lived signing
    or verifying keyrings, in turn reducing the attacker surface for key
    compromise.

  Another key misuse-resistance contribution within Sigstore is *machine
  identities*. A machine identity behaves similarly to a human identity
  (Alice or Bob), but identifies a machine instead of a human. For example,
  `github.com/example/example/.github/workflows/release.yml@refs/tags/v1.2.3`
  could be the machine identity of a GitHub Actions workflow that ran from
  `release.yml` within `example/example` against the `v1.2.3` tag.

## Motivation

The conda ecosystem contains metadata that answers the following questions,
in part or in full:

* _Who_ (or _what_) published this package?
* _What_ is the package's hash?
* _Where_ was this package _published from_, and where _to_?
* _When_ was this package published?

However, this metadata is not currently **cryptographically verifiable**:
the consuming party must either trust it as presented, or verify it manually
against independent sources of truth (such as a project's release history).

Attestations that present this metadata in a cryptographically
verifiable manner are desirable for a number of reasons:

* Package maintainers wish to demonstrate the integrity and authenticity
  of their package uploads;
* Individual downstream users wish to verify the integrity and authenticity of
  packages they consume, without placing additional trust in the
  channel or channel's hosting server;
* Attestations change the sophistication and risk profile for attackers in
  defenders' favor: the attacker must be sufficiently sophisticated
  to access private key material, *and* have a risk tolerance profile that
  accepts exposure via auditable transparency logs.

More broadly, attestation schemes like the one proposed in this CEP have
seen adoption in similar and related ecosystems:

* Python (PyPA/PyPI): [PEP 740] and [PyPI - Attestations]
* NodeJS (npm): [npm - Generating provenance statements]
* Ruby (RubyGems): [rubygems/release-gem]

## Specification

### Attestation format

This CEP proposes the following attestation statement layout, using the
[in-toto Statement schema]:

- `predicateType` **MUST** be `https://schemas.conda.org/publish-v1.json`
- `subject` **MUST** be a single [`ResourceDescriptor`], with the following
  constraints:
    - `subject[0].name` **MUST** be the full filename of the conda package
      that will be part of the `repodata.json` and under which it will appear on
      the server.
    - `subject[0].digest` **MUST** be a [`DigestSet`], and it **MUST** contain
      a single `sha256` entry with the SHA256 hash of the conda package.
- `predicate` **MAY** be present. If present and not `null`, it **MUST** be a
  JSON object with the following fields:
    - `targetChannel` **MUST** be a string, indicating where the package
      is being uploaded to. This field **MUST** be a valid URL with no
      trailing slashes.

An example of a compliant statement is provided below:

```json
{
    "_type": "https://in-toto.io/Statement/v0.1",
    "subject": [{
        "name": "file-name-0.0.1-h123456_5.conda",
        "digest": {"sha256": "01ba4719c80b6fe911b091a7c05124b64eeece964e09c058ef8f9805daca546b"},
    }],
    "predicateType": "https://schemas.conda.org/publish-v1.json",
    "predicate": {
        "targetChannel": "https://prefix.dev/conda-forge",
    }
}
```

### Signing and distributing

This CEP recommends the following signing process:

1. The signer (i.e. Alice or Alice's trusted machine identity) uses a
   [Sigstore]-compatible client to generate an ephemeral keypair and bind it to
   their identity via a public certificate.
2. The signer generates an in-toto statement as described above, and
   produces an attestation by signing that statement with their ephemeral
   private key.
3. The signer uploads their attestation to the Sigstore transparency log
   as a [DSSE] envelope.
4. The signer produces a [Sigstore bundle] containing their certificate,
   attestation, and transparency log inclusion proof.

Each of these steps is performed transparently by a Sigstore client like
[sigstore-python], except for step (2) as it concerns the specific
layout of the signed-over statement.

The result of this process is a single Sigstore bundle, which can be
distributed alongside the conda package or otherwise made discoverable.

This CEP does not proscribe a distribution mechanism. Prior art for distribution
mechanisms can be found in the PyPI and RubyGems ecosystems, e.g.
[PyPI's Integrity API].

### Verifying

This CEP recommends the following verification process:

1. The verifier retrieves Alice's conda package and associated
   Sigstore bundle.
1. The verifier performs a standard Sigstore verification process against
   the bundle, using Alice's identity (or machine identity) as the
   signing identity. This process produces a verified in-toto statement.

   This step requires the verifier to establish trust in the identity
   being verified against.

   Exact mechanisms for establishing this trust are
   outside the scope of this CEP. However, one option is a TOFU (trust on first
   use) scheme with an attestation-aware conda channel, where package names
   are "locked" to attesting identities on first use, with subsequent updates
   being verified against that identity.

1. The verifier checks the in-toto statement for consistency against their
   ground truth:

   - The `predicateType` field **MUST** be `https://schemas.conda.org/publish-v1.json`.
   - The `subject[0].name` field **MUST** match the filename of the conda package.
   - The `subject[0].digest` field **MUST** match the SHA256 hash of the conda
     package.
   - The `predicate.targetChannel` field **SHOULD** match the channel that
     the package was retrieved from, if `predicate` is present. However, the
     verifier **MAY** choose to allow a channel mismatch, e.g. if the known
     context is a mirroring context (where the conda package was originally
     published to a different channel, but is now being consumed from
     a mirror).

At the end of this process, the verifier is confident in the following facts:

- The package was published by the signer (Alice or Alice's machine identity).
  - If the publisher is a machine identity, this further establishes source
    provenance via the machine identity's claims. See [Sigstore OID information]
    for additional information on these claims.
- The package is authentic and integral modulo trust in the signer.

## Discussion

This predicate adds basic verifiable facts about the package. It will tie the
producer of the package to the target channel. This is similar to what PyPI has
implemented with the [PyPI publish
attestation](https://docs.pypi.org/attestations/publish/v1/). Since there is no
single authoritative index in the Conda world, we add the `targetChannel` field
to reach parity.

On the server, the certificate should be tested against the Trusted Publisher
used to upload the certificate to establish a chain of trust.

## Future work

Once sigstore attestations are established and more research has been done, we
might want to use the [SLSA (Supply-chain Levels for Software
Artifacts)](https://slsa.dev) spec as base for predicates in the conda
ecosystem.

[in-toto]: https://in-toto.io
[Sigstore]: https://sigstore.dev
[Fulcio]: https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio
[RFC 6962]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6962
[OpenID Connect]: https://openid.net/connect/
[PEP 740]: https://peps.python.org/pep-0740/
[PyPI - Attestations]: https://docs.pypi.org/attestations/
[npm - Generating provenance statements]: https://docs.npmjs.com/generating-provenance-statements
[rubygems/release-gem]: https://github.com/rubygems/release-gem
[in-toto Statement schema]: https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/v1/statement.md
[`ResourceDescriptor`]: https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/v1/resource_descriptor.md
[`DigestSet`]: https://github.com/in-toto/attestation/blob/main/spec/v1/digest_set.md
[DSSE]: https://github.com/secure-systems-lab/dsse/blob/master/envelope.md
[Sigstore bundle]: https://docs.sigstore.dev/about/bundle/
[sigstore-python]: https://github.com/sigstore/sigstore-python
[Sigstore OID information]: https://github.com/sigstore/fulcio/blob/main/docs/oid-info.md
[PyPI's Integrity API]: https://docs.pypi.org/api/integrity/
